Add tutorial (#421)
pester/docs: tutorial/2-testing-a-module/1-setup.mdx

---
id: setup
title: Creating the sample module
description: Build the Planetarium module scaffold with a manifest and a loader that dot-sources public and private functions
---

Before you can test a module, you need a module. This page builds the empty shell of Planetarium — no functions yet, just the structure that everything else hangs off. It is deliberately the same structure most real PowerShell modules use, because the testing problems in later pages come *from* that structure.

## The layout

Create the folders from inside your `pester-tutorial` working folder:

```powershell
New-Item -Path ./Planetarium/Public -ItemType Directory -Force
New-Item -Path ./Planetarium/Private -ItemType Directory -Force
```

That gives you the two folders that matter:

- **`Public/`** — functions your users call. These get exported.

> - **`Private/`** — helpers that only the module itself uses. These do not.

Author: ```suggestion
That gives you the three folders that matter:

- **`Planetarium/`** - the module's root folder.
- **`Planetarium/Public/`** — functions your users call. These get exported.
- **`Planetarium/Private/`** — helpers that only the module itself uses, hidden from the users.
```

That split is the whole reason this module is interesting to test. Public functions are easy to reach from a test. Private ones, by design, are not — that is a page of its own later.

## The loader

> The `.psm1` file is the module's root. Ours does not define any functions itself; it finds the `.ps1` files and dot-sources them.

Author: ```suggestion
The `.psm1` file is the module's root script, executed when your import the module. Ours does not define any functions itself; it finds the `.ps1` files, one per function, and dot-sources them.
```

```powershell title="Planetarium/Planetarium.psm1"
$public = @(Get-ChildItem -Path $PSScriptRoot/Public/*.ps1 -Exclude *.Tests.ps1 -ErrorAction SilentlyContinue)

> $private = @(Get-ChildItem -Path $PSScriptRoot/Private/*.ps1 -Exclude *.Tests.ps1 -ErrorAction SilentlyContinue)

Author: ```suggestion
$public = @(Get-ChildItem -Path "$PSScriptRoot/Public/*.ps1" -Exclude *.Tests.ps1 -ErrorAction SilentlyContinue)
$private = @(Get-ChildItem -Path "$PSScriptRoot/Private/*.ps1" -Exclude *.Tests.ps1 -ErrorAction SilentlyContinue)
```

foreach ($file in @($public + $private)) {
    . $file.FullName
}

Export-ModuleMember -Function @($public.BaseName)
```

Two details are worth pausing on.

`Export-ModuleMember -Function @($public.BaseName)` exports everything in `Public/` and nothing in `Private/`. The folder a file sits in is what decides whether it is part of your public surface — there is no attribute or naming convention doing it.

> `-Exclude *.Tests.ps1` matters because of where we are about to put our tests. Pester's convention is that test files sit next to the code they test, so `Public/` will shortly contain both `Get-Planet.ps1` and `Get-Planet.Tests.ps1`. Without that exclusion the loader would dot-source your test files into the module — and then export them.

Author: ```suggestion
`-Exclude *.Tests.ps1` allows us to place the tests files next to the code. Without that exclusion the loader would dot-source your test files into the module — and then export them.
```

:::warning Test files next to your code need excluding from the loader
If you skip `-Exclude *.Tests.ps1`, your tests get loaded as part of the module. This tends to fail in confusing ways rather than obvious ones, because your `Describe` blocks run at import time. If you would rather keep tests entirely separate, a mirrored `tests/` folder is the other convention Pester supports — see [file placement and naming](../../docs/usage/file-placement-and-naming).
:::

## The manifest

The `.psd1` manifest is the module's metadata. Generate it rather than writing it by hand:

```powershell
New-ModuleManifest -Path ./Planetarium/Planetarium.psd1 `
    -RootModule 'Planetarium.psm1' `
    -ModuleVersion '0.1.0' `
    -Author 'Your Name' `
    -Description 'Explore the solar system.' `
    -PowerShellVersion '5.1'
```

Open the generated file and find the `FunctionsToExport` line:

```powershell title="Planetarium/Planetarium.psd1"
FunctionsToExport = '*'
```

> This is a second gate in front of `Export-ModuleMember`. A function has to pass *both* to be visible to your users. Leaving it as `'*'` means the manifest waves everything through and the `.psm1` makes the real decision, which is what we want while functions are still being added.

Author: ```suggestion
This is a second gate in front of `Export-ModuleMember`. A function has to pass **both** to be visible to your users. Leaving it as `'*'` means the manifest waves everything through and the `.psm1` makes the real decision, which is what we want while functions are still being added.
```

:::tip When a function you exported is not there

> `FunctionsToExport` is the first thing to check. If it is set to an explicit list — or worse, to `@()` — then adding a function to `Public/` will not make it appear, no matter what `Export-ModuleMember` says.

Author: ```suggestion
:::tip Update before publishing a module
Using `FunctionsToExport = '*'` is convenient while developing, but should be change to a array of public function names before publishing. This is required for best performance and auto-import.

For this module: `FunctionsToExport = @('Get-Planet','Get-PlanetDistance','Export-PlanetReport').
```

:::

## Checking it imports

> Nothing is in the module yet, but it should still load cleanly:

Author: ```suggestion
Nothing is in the module yet, but we can still try to load it:
```

```powershell
Import-Module ./Planetarium/Planetarium.psd1 -Force -PassThru
```

```

> ModuleType Version    PreRelease Name
> ---------- -------    ---------- ----
> Script     0.1.0                 Planetarium

Author: ```suggestion
Export-ModuleMember: Cannot bind parameter 'Function' to the target. Exception setting "Function": "Cannot process argument because the value of argument "pattern" is null. Change the value of argument "pattern" to a non-null value."

ModuleType Version    PreRelease Name
---------- -------    ---------- ----
Script     0.1.0                 Planetarium
```

```

> An empty module that imports without error is exactly what you want right now. If instead you get an error, it is almost certainly a typo in the `.psm1` path handling — fix it before moving on, because every page from here imports this module.

Author: ```suggestion
The error above is expected for now, as there's no functions files in the `Public` folder yet.
```
